---
title: 'The Future of Agriculture: Mutation Breeding and the Promise of Genetic Improvement'
date: 2018-12-31
permalink: /posts/2013/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

The bolg article is based on my experience I garnered, working as a Undergraduate Intern at Stress Physiogy and Molecular Biology Lab, School Of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India.

**1. The Importance of Rice: A Global Perspective**

Rice, a staple food for over half the world's population, provides more than 20% of daily calories for over 3.5 billion people. It contributes to 19% of global human per capita energy and 13% of per capita protein. Given its significant role in combating poverty and hunger, the United Nations declared 2004 as the International Year of Rice.
In India, the growth rates of agriculture and related sectors have seen considerable fluctuations due to factors like inadequate rainfall or drought. This necessitates the development of superior rice varieties that can yield high grain under stress conditions like drought and high temperature.

**2. Addressing the Challenges: The Case of IR64**
IR64, a popular but sensitive variety of rice in India, is widely grown and accounts for a significant portion of the breeder seed produced in the country. This article addresses the common stress conditions affecting IR64, such as high temperature and water stress, and discusses efforts to make this variety more tolerant to these conditions through plant mutation breeding techniques.

**3. Mutation Breeding: A Historical Perspective**
Mutation breeding is a process that induces sudden hereditary changes in an organism's genetics through chemical, physical or biological agents. This process has been exploited for animal domestication and crop improvement since ancient times.
The foundation of modern breeding techniques was laid down between 1700 and 1900 with discoveries like sex in plants, hybridization, cell theory, and Darwin’s theories on natural selection. The rediscovery of Mendel’s Law in the early 20th century further explicated the mechanism of segregation of traits and laws of inheritance.
4. The Selection of IR64 Variety
IR64, launched in the Philippines in 1985, was developed primarily for the production of irrigated rice. It was developed as a replacement for the previously cultivated IR8 and IR36 respectively, characterized by good physical appearance and a typical long-grained variety with high yield.
However, resistance to abiotic stress was not a goal in its development. It is generally considered to be sensitive to abiotic stresses and has therefore been cultivated extensively in favorable rain conditions. IR64 is considered sensitive to water stress, resulting in a notable reduction in yield.

**5. Determining the Optimal Dose**

A crucial step in mutation breeding is determining the optimal dose for the selected mutagen. This is the dose that yields the highest mutation frequency with minimal unintended damage. In the case of physical mutagens, tests for radio-sensitivity are carried out to estimate this dose. The absorbed rate of radiation is measured in grays, with one gray being the absorption of one joule of energy in the form of radiation by one kilogram of matter.
6. The Impact of Radiation on Cells
The main target for gamma radiation is water molecules, which constitute 80% of a living cell's total content. This results in the production of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS), which can damage cellular homeostasis and lead to cell death through oxidative damage. However, recent scientific evidence shows that ROS plays a significant role in plant signaling and regulation of biological activities such as growth, development, and response to biotic and abiotic stress factors.

**7. Discussion: The Need for Sustainable Agricultural Development**
Irresponsible human activities have led us to the brink of a serious climate change catastrophe. The sustainable approach to scientific development focuses on safer use of earth’s resources without compromising anyone's needs. This includes higher productivity through high yielding technology and research for disease and extreme environment condition resistant plants. Such advancements would not only manage sustainable growth of the environment but also reduce farmers' dependence on pesticides and lower the cost of production per unit of output.

**8. The Promise of Genetic Improvement: A Path to Food Security**
The genetic enhancement of the widely cultivated IR64 variety could be a transformative development, particularly in developing nations like India. Despite its widespread cultivation, there has been limited research on this variety. The success of a breeding program is heavily reliant on the availability of germplasm with the desired traits.
In conclusion, mutagenic crops promises the future of plant breeding and play a pivotal role in it. They offer the potential for higher yields and increased resistance to stress conditions. More importantly, they hold the promise of a sustainable approach to agricultural development, paving the way towards achieving food security through mutagenesis.
