---
title: "Ethnobotany: The scientific philosophy behind using plants in religious ceremonies in India"
collection: talks
type: "Poster Presentation (Awarded with Best Poster Presentation for Students)"
permalink: /talks/2012-03-01-talk-1
venue: "National Seminar on ‘Recent Trends of Research in Medicinal Plants and Applied Sciences’"
date: 2019-10-11
location: "Department of Botany, Ramjas College, University of Delhi"
---
Ethnobotany encompasses a multidisciplinary scientific approach that investigates the intricate interplay between human cultures and the plant kingdom. In the Indian context, ethnobotany assumes a significant role in comprehending the utilization of plants in religious ceremonies. The integration of plants in the religious practices of India has deep roots in traditional knowledge and spirituality, with plants serving as an essential component of religious ceremonies for centuries. This practice reflects the intimate connection between nature and spirituality, with various plants holding symbolic significance in Hinduism, Buddhism, and other Indian religions. Ethnobotanical studies in India reveal that plants feature not only as offerings in religious rituals but also in the preparation of traditional medicines used for healing purposes. The ancient Ayurvedic system of medicine relies heavily on plant-based remedies, underscoring the intersection of spirituality and healthcare. The present study endeavors to examine the conventional and therapeutic attributes of certain plants such as _Cocos nucifera_ Linn. (Coconut), _Ocimum sanctum_ Linn. (Holy Basil), and _Aegle marmelos_ Linn. Corr. (Holy Fruit tree), among others, which have been assimilated into our culture owing to their multifarious advantages, thus paving the way for the conservation of nature and culture through a divine approach. Additionally, religious texts, songs, and myths often make references to plants, underscoring their spiritual significance. The discipline of ethnobotany in India provides insight into how plants are not merely botanical organisms, but also bearers of cultural, religious, and historical connotations.
